have loved for the whole association of brothers.
These words were written down nearly 2,000 years ago,
but we need them now more than ever.
How can we love something as vast as a global brotherhood?
And in this loveless world,
how can we make sure that our love never fades?
We were baptized.
We formally became part of this brotherhood.
Our hearts were full of joy,
but as the years pass,
it is only too easy to lose sight
of why we love this brotherhood.
Let's remind ourselves.
Consider three things that our brotherhood is doing.
It is busy in the preaching work.
It comes to the aid of those in need.
It gathers together to worship to Hovea God.
First, you can find our brotherhood
preaching the good news of God's kingdom,
wherever you go in the world.
Jesse is preparing to go out in the field ministry.
You got everything?
I think so.
I'm all packed up and ready to go.
Well, there's your coffee.
You're going to call me tonight.
But while the luggage,
he lives in Alaska,
a vast region more than twice the size of France.
Many people there live in areas so remote
that there is only one way to reach them
by airplane.
There are no roads on 50% of that territory.
It is desolation.
There's not even a trail,
but there's about 200 villages
with Eskimo, Indian,
Athabaskan, Shimshan,
clink at tribes,
probably 70- some thousand people
scattered in those areas.
Let me show you here.
The reason why we're like this is...
The brothers carefully select the villages to be visited.
They prepare the airplane
and recruit a crew of pilots and publishers
for a two, three, or four-day trip.
And the pilot, that's what I do for a living.
So there's a certain thrill with flying,
but yet at the same time,
that part is just a job.
I think what I really enjoy is the ministry.
Being able to reach people out in these remote areas
and bring the truth to them.
You're going over empty spaces.
You don't see a living soul,
and you wonder,
what is this village going to be like?
So it's a spirit of anticipation.
What is it going to be like when you land?
The local people are often suspicious
of men in formal or business attire,
so the brothers make an exception
to our usual standard
and dress informally for these visits.
First, they have to get to know you.
They want to know,
why are you there?
Once they understand
that you're there,
bringing them a message from the Bible,
then they kind of open up.
And we try to show them basic truths
in the Bible like Psalms 83, 18, or John 17, 3.
We'll leave our address and phone number that way.
We encourage them to try to call us
or try to write us so that we can't study with them.
Of course, this type of witnessing
has its challenges as well.
Unsanitary conditions,
swarms of mosquitoes,
or even worse.
Almost every household
they're told is watch out for the bears,
because the bears were there that morning.
And this is really something you have to be careful of.
Such challenges only draw the brothers closer together.
Literally, it was mosquitoes that found them.
Which one did you get?
A common bond between the brothers.
It's a very building experience.
Little by little,
we've been getting through it
so we can say now we've covered all the territory
with the good news at least one time.
In several places, two times.
And in some places,
our third visit has taken place.
This witnessing that we do up here
and helps me appreciate
that we are fulfilling that Bible prophecy in Matthew 24, 14
about preaching the good news
to all the inhabited Earth.
Because that's what we're doing up here.
These are remote areas.
And the society is making sure that they're getting done.
Our brotherhood has found that in this sophisticated
European city, as in so many others,
most people are somewhat apathetic
about the Bible's message.
The members of one congregation, however,
are assigned to preach exclusively
in a very different kind of territory.
The vast harbor of Antwerp.
The brothers arrive at the docks
before the ships are open for boarding.
They use this time to witness to the truck drivers
who come from many lands to service the harbor.
And then, it's on to the ships.
I was very excited.
I remember that.
But I was also scared because I didn't know
what was going to happen.
I didn't know how it worked
to preaching on the ship.
The witnesses expect to meet people of all races
and speaking almost any language.
Sailors from far away or little known countries
are often amazed to see literature
in their own language.
On the ships, the witnesses find a very receptive audience.
They understand that only God could protect them
against the powers of nature and the sea.
I never met a seaman who was an atheist, never.
The Watchtower Society's videos make an effective tool
for witnessing in this territory.
In this way, we've even had up to 15 people at once,
watched three videos of that choice.
And afterward, there are many, many questions.
In this ever-changing territory,
how can the brothers make return visits on interested people?
The local newspaper tells which ships will be in port each week.
So when the brothers meet an interested sailor,
they carefully record which ship he works on
so that they can find him again.
Before long, they bring their students to congregation meetings.
In just the first three years since the congregation was formed,
over 1,400 sailors from 41 lands visited the meetings.
On average, five new Bible studies are started each month.
One man was really eager to become witness.
He just read one magazine.
He said, this is the truth.
He started talking to the other ones.
So we came on the ship and his man was preaching.
He said, I need books, I need books.
One day, I went to the ship.
And in the country, the witnesses were banned.
And we visited the ship three evenings.
In the last evening, we stayed to 1.30 in the night,
preaching the good news.
When we left the ship, the whole crew came on deck.
And they were all shouting, buy Jehovah's Witness
till we see you in the paradise.
From the first ship we ever did,
we really fell in love with these people for the first ship.
You see?
So Jesus Christ.
It is the mightiest river in the world.
But the Amazon River is also a thoroughfare,
a liquid highway stretching nearly 4,000 miles
from the highlands of Peru across Brazil to the Atlantic.
In the dense jungles of Peru,
the Amazon enables our brotherhood
to reach people with the good news.
Special pioneers have moved to this region.
One of the remotest and most rugged in the world
in order to preach to the people.
The river brings them right into some villages.
Sometimes they are able to witness
without even leaving their boat.
Other villages, though, can only be reached on foot.
They are quite hospitable.
They ask you to come in.
You can gather the whole family and all of them
sit down to listen.
Sometimes the villagers simply gather up their children
and ask the pioneers to hold a Bible class.
At this village, the chief is a return visit.
The brothers preach to him in Spanish,
and he translates the message for the benefit of his people.
The brothers also find a receptive audience
at a local leper colony.
Here in the Amazon,
sometimes you meet natives who have not heard about God.
To reach them with their truth is a beautiful experience.
The pioneers readily admit that this territory has its hardships.
When we go preaching into the forest,
maybe the snakes.
The heat,
heat that sometimes lasts into the night.
No electric light, no water.
Well, it would be loneliness to fight against the loneliness
since I am far from my family.
But where others might see only problems,
these pioneers see solutions.
Conduct Bible studies with the people.
I try to make them my family and see them as my future brothers.
I always stay very close to them
so that the loneliness that I feel is not so bad.
The ladies become my friends.
They can tell me their problems, and I try to help them.
When you see the people coming to the Kingdom Hall,
they forget the heat and the difficulties.
Obviously, Jehovah blesses the work that we are doing.
Thanks to Jehovah, at least for now I am conducting 25 Bible studies.
And I would say that 50% come to the Kingdom Hall.
There are only three of Jehovah's Witnesses in the region and us.
The two special pioneers.
But 89 people attended the memorial.
It really is a great privilege for me to be working for the Kingdom here in this part of Peru.
To know that many more brothers are also doing it in different parts of the earth,
that really encourages us.
We are not alone.
They are far from alone.
All over the world, the brotherhood is busy in the same work.
Witnesses who live in the cities and larger villages of Mozambique
regularly travel to remote rural areas.
They carefully plan their visits according to the seasons.
This enables them to reach hardworking farmers and their families.
Hood is working shoulder to shoulder, preaching to people,
wherever they may be found.
Are you taking part in the preaching work where you live?
You may feel that what you do is rather ordinary.
But when you preach, however and wherever you do it,
you are taking part in the same wonderful work.
You're doing a work that draws you closer to your brothers and sisters.
A work that reaches people and saves lives.
A work that pleases Jehovah God.
Passers-by barely notice this spot.
Just an empty lot in a bustling Japanese city.
To one of our brothers, though, this place is full of meaning.
I lived here for 27 years.
My wife and two daughters and I had a happy life here.
On January 17, 1995, Takau Jinguji, like so many others in Kobe, Japan,
saw his whole world turn upside down.
When the earthquake hit, there was a tremor, a big tremor.
But I had no idea what was happening.
In the next moment, I turned over and reached for my wife's hand.
And she reached for mine.
And we touched.
But then, after the next quake, our hands were separated.
Of the 5,500 killed in the quake, 13 were Jehovah's Witnesses
and two were unbaptized associates.
The quake left over 300,000 homeless.
350 homes of Jehovah's Witnesses were destroyed or severely damaged.
Kotoya, the oldest of three children,
waited in mounting fear as the rubble of her home was cleared away.
Her parents were missing.
Then we saw a man's hand,
and the two of them were under there.
Kunio, Tsunasawa and Elder,
was at the children's side when the parents were found.
The doctor tried mouth-to-mouth resuscitation to get them breathing,
but he couldn't, both the mother and father had died.
Takau Jinguji crawled from this rubble,
battered and bruised,
desperate to find his wife and daughter.
The place where my wife and daughter were trapped just became a sea of fire.
They tried putting out the fire,
but there was no water, not even a fire extinguisher.
There was nothing we could do but stand and watch.
Honestly speaking, knowing that they did die instantly helps me to cope.
I was able to remain very calm.
At that time, I really felt Jehovah's help.
Even in the worst of moments,
the brothers and sisters were there to support one another.
From the time they dug my father and mother out,
brother and sister Tsunasawa were right there by my side.
The two of them stayed with us and went to the morgue with us.
She held my hand.
She didn't say a word,
but her feelings got through to me.
In the face of all this devastation,
the brotherhood launched the relief work immediately.
The circus giving aid selected a few kingdom halls
and gave instructions together relief supplies,
water and basic good stuff to these locations immediately.
Takaujin Guruji had just lost his wife and daughter.
Still, he joined the relief work.
I was able to take part fully in that activity
and I surely felt Jehovah's strength.
Within days, brothers from the branch near Tokyo were at the disaster site.
Quake victims were deeply moved.
The relief work soon progressed from providing food and water
to protecting damaged homes from the elements.
The neighbors watched all the brothers working
and said things like, where did they come from?
Is it Jehovah's legend?
Spiritual needs were among the first address,
shepherding calls, Christian meetings,
and the preaching were continued uninterrupted.
Because we know there is a resurrection
declaring that hope to others can heal the hearts of those who lost loved ones.
In one relief program,
Quake victims were taken by bus to an assembly hall facility
where they were given a clean room to spend the night,
a hot bath, and all the supplies they needed.
They also attended a meeting and went in field service
in an undamaged territory.
Then they would take us back home right to our house.
I thought it was a very kind arrangement.
The Nagais, a disabled pioneer couple in Kobe,
opened their tiny apartment for use as a kingdom hall.
They had a peak of 72 people at the meeting here.
The brothers who used the place this way were really thankful
because they didn't have anywhere to meet.
The brothers endeavored to help all whom they could,
including non-witnesses.
We went to the largest hospital in Kobe
and we shared with them our futons, blankets, rice, and many things.
The earthquake continued to take its toll for years afterward.
It's been three years since it happened,
but no aday goes by that I don't think about the earthquake.
However, Quake survivors have drawn great comfort
from staying close to Jehovah and the worldwide brotherhood.
Of course, there were times when I myself got weak
because of the pain and loneliness.
But at those times, I got a lot of comfort
from attending the meetings or doing personal Bible reading
or reading the magazines.
Those who were concerned about us
sent letters and small memos.
They really encouraged us.
The brothers and sisters left their work
and they used that time to help us even risking their secure work.
So I felt that love.
Kotoyo had lost her parents.
But she was soon part of a new family.
Some months after the earthquake,
brother and sister Tsunasawa invited her
and her siblings to come live with them.
They gave us the strength to go on.
The congregation members and brothers and sisters
from other congregations were a great comfort to me.
They said, just seeing your face at the meetings encourages us.
That really comforted me.
The earthquake had devastated a city
but the brotherhood emerged stronger than ever.
I strongly feel that the brothers and sisters
have been doing just as Jesus says.
They love the brothers and sisters in the same way he does.
I'm just so glad to be part of this organization.
The decade of the 1990s saw many disasters.
In August 1992, Hurricane Andrew caused tremendous damage.
Our brotherhood was praised for its relief efforts.
A local newspaper commented,
no one is slamming doors on the Jehovah's Witnesses this week,
even if they have doors to slam.
About 3,000 witness volunteers from across the country
have converged on the disaster area.
First to help their own, then to help others.
The paper added, any military organization
might envy the witness's precision, discipline and efficiency.
First disasters of the 1990s were manly.
In 1994, ethnic hatred and civil war
ripped apart the countries of Rwanda and Burundi.
Hundreds of thousands were killed.
Refugees numbered well over a million.
Similar troubles have plagued Liberia, Sierra Leone and Congo.
Among Jehovah's Witnesses, such disasters
have meant death for hundreds.
Poverty, disease, homelessness and hunger for thousands more.
The Brotherhood works hard to come to their aid.
During one relief effort in July 1994,
witnesses in France, Switzerland and Belgium
contributed over $1,600,000 to a fund for their brothers
in Rwanda and Burundi.
Notified of the need on a Friday,
the Brothers in Europe shipped 35 tons of relief provisions
by the following Wednesday.
More recently, witnesses in Europe gathered more than 400
tons of relief supplies to ship to their brothers
in Kinshasa, Congo.
This kind of help keeps people alive.
But it does more.
It reminds all concerned that all Brotherhood
is not merely a thing of words.
It is real.
Now, you may never have had the opportunity to take part
in relief efforts for such extreme cases of distress.
Does that mean that you are no part of this work?
Not at all.
In this troubled world, distress takes many forms.
When you visit the sick,
when you help out the elderly and infirm,
when you take time to comfort a depressed soul,
when you take an interest in your brothers and sisters
in the faith,
you add your own part to the great identifying mark
of this Brotherhood.
Love.
Nothing is more important to our Brotherhood
than worshipping Jehovah God.
Our places of worship are modest.
Still, they are important.
As the Brotherhood continues to expand,
more and more kingdom halls are needed.
Recently, that was a problem in Machachi,
a city nestled in the mountains of Ecuador.
Three or four brothers with construction experience
guide the brothers doing the work.
With the help of the brothers,
we can work in less time,
and all the labor is free of charge.
When all the preparations are complete,
the period of intense activity begins.
Many brothers who work secularly
made arrangements beforehand to take days off
so that they could come and support the work.
This is a joyful experience
for brothers to come from afar
to help build Jehovah's house of worship.
It brought us closer to one another and to Jehovah.
On these projects,
there is plenty of work for all the volunteers.
We have seen a beautiful, joyful attitude.
Everyone collaborates,
all are willing from the youngest to the oldest.
Everyone involved wants the new kingdom hall
to serve as a good witness to the community.
During the construction,
we have heard positive comments from people.
Many are amazed that the unity among Jehovah's Witnesses.
For example,
people see that we are industrious,
that we are like ants.
They would like to see other people in the community
working together like this to get things done.
At last, the job is complete,
and the time has come to dedicate the new kingdom hall.
And so brothers,
this kingdom hall has dedicated to Jehovah.
By outlying such meetings.
Estonia, in Eastern Europe,
offers its citizens religious freedom.
Our brothers and sisters are now free to meet together for worship.
But decades ago,
throughout Eastern Europe and Russia,
things were far different.
These men from the secret police, the KGB said,
where is Jehovah?
We are going to make sure that the name Jehovah
will never even be remembered in Estonia.
You are going to a camp,
others to Siberia.
Where is your Jehovah?
I was deported to Siberia.
I was eight years old at the time,
and that was in 1951.
We were there seven years,
but later I was imprisoned from 63 to 66.
In 1951, over 300 were deported.
My father and mother included,
so that Jehovah's name would no longer be remembered in Estonia,
period.
And so we began a new life.
We were out in the vast Russian steps,
and we just preached.
Did this severe persecution
put a stop to Christian meetings?
There were meetings,
but they were not these large ones.
It was in small groups that we got together and discussed things.
Also, the place and time of the next meeting were decided.
And you couldn't even say it out loud.
We traveled several hours together.
Before seven in the morning,
we took the children.
They were young.
Sometimes to take them,
we even put them in a shopping bag.
They traveled by bus,
then walked for miles.
Every week,
it took us about 12 hours
to attend the watchtower study.
By the time we got back,
what did the brothers do about literature to study at their meetings?
In the beginning,
we could not reproduce the watchtower,
except by either using a typewriter
or copying by hand.
But a typewriter was a dangerous thing to own in those days.
It couldn't be hidden just anywhere.
It would be found with a metal detector.
It wouldn't house around the ground.
It would easily be found.
But my home has a metal roof.
Near the chimney, under the metal roof,
I had a hiding place.
The brothers reproduced literature
using their own stencils
and hid it all very carefully.
And that was how we survived spiritually all those years,
despite the hardships and persecution.
Change swept across Eastern Europe
in the late 1980s and early 1990s.
In Estonia, the work was legalized in 1991.
Especially for those who for decades were here on the dose
closed conditions as Jehovah's Witnesses
for them to experience this freedom
was of course a very moving experience.
Free to preach openly at last,
the brotherhood in Estonia
and across Eastern Europe and Russia
makes every effort to invite the public
to attend the Christian meetings.
This is especially true at the time of the memorial,
the most important meeting of the year.
One brother recalls the last time
the memorial was held under the ban.
It was in his own small home.
There were exactly 60 people here.
Can you imagine?
60 people sat here in these rooms.
And for us, that was a lot.
But now well, now there are several congregations
and in each one several hundred are present.
The meetings started full speed
and the joy of the brothers was so great.
And what kept ringing in my ears were the words,
the name Jehovah will never even be remembered in Estonia.
Lundazi in Zambia is an unusual village.
Most of the time it stands empty.
But for a few weeks each year,
the place comes alive.
Hundreds of our brothers and sisters
travel there for their conventions.
Many have walked for three days.
We do not stop along the way, except to eat.
And when it is dark, we stop.
We sleep only for a few hours.
And when it is still dark, we wake up
and start traveling again until morning.
We feel very tired because of the heavy luggage that we carry.
But when we arrive and see all these brothers,
we rejoice very much.
Many arrive early to restore and repair the village.
Others gather wood for the countless cookfires
that will be needed.
Before long, the village is humming with life.
The most important work, though,
is preparing for the convention itself.
At last, the program begins.
I cannot tell you my brother.
The trip that we derived from it.
That is the cause for great rejoicing.
Much rejoicing.
After the convention comes the long journey home.
But these brothers and sisters are accustomed to long walks.
It is not strange for us to walk
because we were born in Africa.
A country where many are poor.
It is our way of life.
We should press forward and not shrink back.
Mountains do not matter.
Walking day and night does not matter.
But what we want is that life we are looking forward
to attaining in the future.
For another group of witnesses,
walking to their district convention is not an option.
They live on an island in Lake Chilwa, Malawi.
We were on the ban for about 27 years.
We didn't know a million is only at night.
But for some reason, this has changed.
And we are now able to watch it every day.
On Lake Chilwa, as in most of rural Africa,
the business of surviving day-to-day consumes
a great deal of time and energy.
Our daily lives are somewhat difficult.
The fields are barren, insufficient.
The money to buy first-year equipment is very hard to find.
In spite of difficulties,
these brothers find great encouragement in their meetings.
Getting to the district convention requires an expedition of sorts.
There are some difficulties because it is a great distance
from here to the convention site.
The major problem is that we have to cross the lake.
When we reach the other side,
some use a car,
some use bicycles,
others bought buses,
then we have others who go on foot because they are disadvantaged.
For some, this convention will be a personal landmark,
this small congregation of 62 publishers
has seven candidates for baptism
from one side of the island,
and three from the other side.
Even some of those who have qualified for baptism still ask,
are we truly going to be baptized this very week?
They are very excited.
At last, they are at the convention.
Their intense desire to be fed spiritually
has brought them all this way.
What makes me feel very happy at the meetings is one,
seeing the feces of the brothers,
two, hearing expressions that the brothers make,
and three, singing songs of praise.
Actually, that associating with the brothers
is one of the most important things in my life.
All are delighted as the baptismal candidates stand
and voice their resolve to serve Jehovah.
These disciples are about to take the most important step of their lives.
This day, they publicly embrace Jehovah
as their rightful sovereign.
They also become part of our brotherhood.
After their baptism,
our ten new brothers and sisters are ready for their journey home.
But their journey as Christians is just beginning.
When you journey to your own Christian meetings,
you may not meet the same challenges.
But you have your own challenges to face.
We all do.
Despite all obstacles,
we are there at our meetings, week after week.
Why?
The reason is simple.
For the same reason,
our brothers and sisters are deeply touched
when they get to attend meetings again after years under ban.
Personally, for me,
meeting an each convention was such a big emotional experience.
I can only say,
Jehovah, Jehovah,
a prayer of thanks as the tears fall.
For the same reason,
we are moved to help our brothers and sisters in need.
I would like to take this opportunity to tell the brothers and sisters
around the world how thankful I am
for all the help you've gave us.
That one thought says it all.
Of course, I am very thankful to Jehovah,
the one who led me to this organization.
For the same reason,
we preach faithfully whenever and however we can.
When you have the opportunity to give these people a message
that some of them have never had before,
even though they've had a Bible,
that is the peak of privilege and a wonderful honor.
For the same reason,
we dedicated our lives to Jehovah.
It may be years since we became part of this brotherhood,
but our reason for doing so has only grown stronger.
It is the simplest thing.
We love Jehovah,
so we love to learn about him
and to teach others about him.
And we love the people Jehovah loves.
When we help them out in times of need,
we do not expect God to thank us.
We thank God.
This brotherhood he has given us is a gift that touches our hearts.
Every passing day gives us more reasons to have love
for our whole association of brothers.